Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Duncan Pritchard. He is
distinguished professor of Philosophy in the Philosophy Department at
the University of California Irvine. And he works mostly
in epistemology. And today we're going to focus on
topics like truth, epistemic, relativism, epistemic luck, epistemic, risk,
education, intellectual virtues, intellectual humility, and some other related
topics. So Dr Pritchard, welcome to the show. It's
a big pleasure to everyone.
Uh Thanks Ricardo and thanks very much for inviting
me. I'm delighted to be on your show.
So I would like to start by asking you
a little bit about truth here. I guess that
perhaps this is a bigger question than it would
seem at first sight. But what does truth mean?
Exactly what is truth, particularly for someone who works
in epistemology like yourself.
So this, this will probably shock you. It shocks
students anyway when I tell them this, but I
don't think truth is a difficult warm. I mean,
what's, what's difficult I think from a philosophical point
of view is that access to the truth, the
truth, it seems to me is just whatever's the
case, right? So I, I think that that simple
conception we have, you know, what does it mean
when we talk about, you know, something you just
think about it, what does it mean? You, you
assert something's the case? What makes it true? Well,
is it the case or isn't it the case?
So, is, is it like that if it's a
fact about the world, is it like that in
the world or is it not like that? What's
really tricky about truth? I think what makes everything
seem complicated? Is that questions about what truth is,
which I think is straightforward questions get intermingled with
questions about how we access the truth. How do
we know we've got the truth? But those, those
are epistemic questions and that's what esos deal with,
which is not so much what is truth, but
how do you know when you have it? What,
what is it to know the truth to grasp
the truth? Uh What is it to be able
to tell when you've got the truth and so
on? So I think the the really interesting questions
here are epistemological truth itself, I think is just,
it's just whatever's the case.
OK. But then getting into the complicated question that
you mentioned there, uh how can we be sure
that we are able through any method and epistemological
approach to access the truth? And if we get
at the truth, how can we be sure that
we really got at it.
Yeah. Well, this is, this is, of course, the,
the, the skeptical problem, I mean, it goes back
to antiquity. Right. Right. From the start of people
asking philosophical questions, they've been asking that particular philosophical
question because it's not clear. Right. It's not clear.
I mean, what, what certainly seems to be the
case is that, um, there's perhaps nothing or certainly
hardly anything about which if you, if you know
it, you can be you, you know, it infallibly,
you know, you know, it's a transparent to you
that, you know, there's always the possibility of error.
So that's just a fact about uh a human
condition as it were. Uh I mean, if, if
God, if there's a God and God has knowledge,
then presumably, yeah, he can be absolutely certain of
what he knows. But that's not our condition. Our
condition is one of inherent fallibility of uh, of
the feasibility of the possibility of a uh but
there's more to skepticism than that because of course,
the mere possibility of error doesn't mean you are
wrong. And so then you get into further questions,
well, like obviously certain truths are more prone to
error than other kinds and so on. So, you
know, a lot of the history of ideas is
about people discovering there's more error than they thought,
you know, you go back to antiquities, people, they
travel to other, other cultures and they realize people
do things differently and then they wonder, well, why,
why do we think this over here? Right? Are
these uh why, what makes our customs true and
so on? And then, you know, you fast forward
um people discover microscopes and then they realize that,
you know what looks like solid objects aren't solid
underneath and so on. They've got lots of things
popping about and so on. So more space than
matter inside solid objects and so on. So people
start to doubt like their, the extent to which
the senses give us truths about the world and
so on. So these, these are hard questions. Um
Yeah. And as I say, when one of the
things I talk about, one of the things I'm
most interested in is, is skepticism, particularly radical skepticism,
you know, are there arguments which show that you
can't know anything? And in fact, I think there
are some pretty good arguments actually or on the
face of it, good arguments that show it's actually
impossible to know anything, anything of substance anyway. Um
So yeah, I mean, I can tell you a
bit about those arguments if you like, but that
that's um yeah, that's that, that as I say,
there's the issue about what the truth is and
then there's this issue about, about access to it.
And I think skeptical trains of thought, they're really
focused on the latter and they, they are interesting
deep philosophical questions.
So tell us a little bit more about radical
skepticism. And perhaps, what do you think is valuable
in that uh sort of approach? I mean, because
of course, people could just uh perhaps say that
it could be easy dismissed because for example, if
a skeptic, a radical skeptic would, would claim something
like, oh, there is no truth out there to
be uh found or something like that. I mean,
since he would be making that a truth claim,
people would just say, oh, you're contradicting yourself because
you say there's no truth to be found. But
then you're making this truth claims. So, uh but
I, I mean, it's more complicated than just, uh
that saying that itself a contradictory, right? I mean,
there's probably more to, with epistemological speaking, uh that
is valuable to consider here, right?
Yeah, I, I it's useful here, I think to,
to compare skepticism as a position versus skepticism as
a paradox. So, so, so in, in, in antiquity,
there's this position called uh Perro Skepticism, the pro
New Skeptics. This is an ethical position that is
in, in the, in the broad sense of an
ethic like uh uh how, how not not ethics
as we think now is morality, but ethics in
the sense of how I ought want to live.
And the idea is that the good life is
a life of doubt. The thought is that it's
dogmatism, it's conviction that leads to disquietude of mind
and the way you get to the quietude of
mind what they call Atia was through a suspension
of belief. So you should employ these skeptical doubts
and in doing so you can end up with,
uh, a kind of, uh, and you sort of
acquiesce and sort of flow through life without asserting
things and so on. Um, AND it's really interesting
position. In fact, it, it has a lot of
commonalities with the eastern thought, like with the Buddhist
and Proto bds thought, Janis thought. And there's a
reason for that because Poo, he, we know he
traveled with um Alexander the great in his campaigns
and he made it across uh to the across
the indus with Alexander. And he met these Indian
mystics and he, he wasn't really interested in their
mysticism, but he was interested in the kind of
the techniques that they were employing uh uh sort
of basically techniques of radical doubt. And so he,
he, he brought them back. He, he got rid
of the religious aspect of this and just focused
on those uh those radical doubt things and uh
aspects, these the modes, he called them these skeptical
techniques. And um and so, yeah, he became very
interested in, in how to live a good life
uh of quite a sh of mind through avoiding
conviction. Um Now, that's PP is quite interesting because
it's, it's, it's a, it's a lived position and
because it's a lived position, you can't doubt everything
because then you wouldn't be able, you couldn't do
anything, you could doubt it. You know, you have,
you need some beliefs in order to function. And
so one of the big questions of pianism is,
how far can the doubt go before it starts
to undermine itself? Um And that's because it's a
position now. Fast forward to dear dear in the
meditation meditations. He has a more radical form of
doubt. And, but for him, it's not a position,
it's really crucial. It's kind of, it's a methodology.
He's not saying, you know, I am literally gonna
doubt everything. Uh WHAT he's saying is like one,
we can sort of do the intellectual exercise as
it were, you know, what would it mean to
doubt everything? So not that we live the doubt,
not that we try and go outside afterwards after
we've done this doubt, but that we just, we
think of it just methodologically speaking, what would it
be to doubt everything? And we try to think
of an epistemology that would survive this, this methodology
of radical doubt. And of course, he's not a
skeptic. Uh HE'S an anti skeptic, but his methodology
as it were lives on and his, his anti
skepticism doesn't. So people got very interested in this
methodology. And I think it's the methodology of paradox.
It's like when you start to think deeply about
our epistemic practices, you realize that there are conflicts
there. We have ways of thinking principles in play,
which if we employed them consistently would entail we
don't know anything and yet we feel like we
do know lots of things. So there's a deep
tension there and that's what a paradox is. You
know, you think of paradox of vagueness, you know,
we, we talk as if there's objects and we
can pick them out. But when we think about
what objects are, they're vague. And so it seems
how does the two things, two things seem to
be in tension with each other or, or free
will, you know, we have these thoughts about what
agency is, what freedom is. And then we look
at the world around us, we think how could
such a thing coexist with that? Well, it's like
that with skepticism, you know, we look at our
ordinary ways of thinking our ordinary epistemic practices and
we think, well, if we follow through these principles,
we have, then uh we would end up with,
we'd end up doubting everything. But we, at the
same time, we feel like we know lots of
things. So there's like a tension there in our
own concept and, and the principles they're appealing to
here, they're, you know, think about radical skeptical hypotheses.
These are scenarios which um everything is as it
seems, everything as it seems in the, in the
normal case, but you're being radically deceived. So, you
know, think about like the, the famous one is
the brain in a a which is kind of
like an adaption of Jar's um evil demon hypothesis.
But you're a brain of a, you know, you're
being fed these experiences through, you know, super supercomputers
are feeding you these experiences to your brain or
whatever. So you feel like you're walking around, I
feel like I'm talking to you. I feel like
I'm sitting in this room as well, but actually
none of it's really happening. I'm just a, a
vat floating around in a vat of nutrients. Uh,
A brain rather folk floating in a vat of
nutrients. And the thought is, well, that's, that's an
error possibility. And normally you have to exclude error
possibilities. You have to know that they're false. Uh,
BUT, but it seems how would, you know that
that possibility is false. That's, that's the difficulty after
all, everything subjectively is exactly the same. You know,
I can't, it's like if you're dreaming, you can't
pinch yourself to wake yourself up because you dream
the pinch. Well, it's like that in the vat,
you know, you, whatever you would do, like, I
suppose you thought I can feel my legs so
I can't be braining a bat. Um, COS brains
and fats don't have legs. But of course, in
the vat, you would have vat legs. You know,
you would feel like you've had legs even though
you don't have legs and so on. So there's
a real issue here seems possibilities should be excluded,
but there are certain kinds of possibilities we can't
exclude. So how is it then that I know
for example, that I've got hands cos obviously the
brain of that doesn't have hands. I feel like
I know I've got hands but everything I appeal
to when I say, I know I've got hands.
Yeah, I can feel them, I can see them.
And so well, the brain of that can feel
them, the brain of that can see them. So
how do you know you've got hands now, how,
how, what, what grounds you come to your contact
with the world doesn't seem to be your senses,
you know, and so on. So there these are
the kind of arguments that make people wonder about
whether it's possible to have knowledge and, and the
worry you had about skepticism being self defeating doesn't
really affect that because it's not, the idea is
not that you're, it's meant the idea is not
that it's coherent to be a radical skeptic. The
idea is more that radical skepticism is a puzzle
that we all face when we start to think
in a thoroughgoing way about our epistemic concept is
paradoxical. That's the thought.
Very interesting. And so it's one thing to ask
what is truth and how we can really uncover
truth if that's even possible to begin with. But
another kind of question is what is valuing truth
because of course, we hear all the time people
saying that they value truth, but what do they
mean by that? Exactly.
So, iii, a lot of philosophers will say that
to value truth means to sort of maximize true
beliefs or something like that. So, you know, you
should, like, try and have as many true beliefs
as you can and try and have as few
false beliefs. I, I think that's completely wrong. It's,
that's a big mistake. Um Because if you think
about it, if that's what value and truth is,
then, uh, it would trip, the value trip would
be easy. You know, don't go outside, just get
a, sit on the internet and find as many
simple things as you can and memorize them or
something like that. You know, that, that would be
easy, you know. Um, uh, THE old, the old
example used to be, uh, get it. We don't
have phone books anymore, but maybe you're old enough
to re, I'm old enough to remember phone books,
you know?
Yes, I remember that.
Yeah. But they, so, you know, you tell this
to the, my students, they look at what phone
books. But, uh, you know, the, the old thing
used to be, well, you can memorize phone numbers.
There you go. And each one's a truth, you
know, and a piece of cake, you know, you
can have lots of true, many true beliefs as
you want with the phone book. But what's interesting
about that is that doesn't feel like it's valuing
truth at all. And I don't think it is
to value truth is to care about, uh is
to care about the, the world around you, to
want to have uh a way of understanding the
world around and by the world around you, I
don't just mean the physical world. I mean, like,
you know, the social world, it could be like
it could be your inner world as well. I
think, you know, it's a, any domain of substance,
you know, like, you know, you uh uh trying
to understand, I think, you know, w to care,
care about the truth, might mean you read novels
because you want to understand the human condition or
something like that. Like mind me, you go to
the art gallery because you want to understand what
the art is trying to tell you and so
on. So it's not just physical facts, but it's
to care about. Uh IT'S to care about the
way things are. And I think what we're, what
we're interested in is um I like to think
in terms of a map. So, you know, if,
if someone asks you to, you know, to, to,
to, to draw a map of a region and
you went away and you mapped and find like
incredible detail, one tiny corner of that region, someone
said to you, you don't understand what a map
is. This is useless, right? Cos it is useless.
You know, to map is to sort of get
the big structure of things and then to start
to, to fill in the detail from that structure.
And I think that's what someone who cares about
the truth does, right? They, it's not like they
don't just want to maximize true beliefs. They wanna,
they wanna understand how it all fits together. They
wanna get the, they, they wanna get to the
heart of things. They wanna see how the this
over here connects to this over here and so
on. And I think this is where the intellectual
virtues are very important. So uh going back to
Aristotle, we have this in fact. But all intellectual
traditions have some similar idea. You have similar ideas
of Confucius, for example, in classical Indian philosophy. But,
but for us, it's Aristotle, it's this thought that,
that, you know, it, that we can think of
good intellectual character. People have good habits of mind
and, and one of the distinctive features of, of
good intellectual characters, people care about the truth. They
care about accuracy, they care about getting things right.
They care about understanding the world around us rather
than they're curious. They wanna see how things fit
together. They wanna, they wanna get to the bottom
of things and it drives their inquiry. And I
think it's that kind of virtuous desire for the
truth is what we're in when we talk about
the value of the truth. That's what we're interested
in. Uh IF what we try to instill in
our students, for example, we don't want our students
to know lots of facts. We want them to
have a drive within themselves, a curiosity to see
how things fit together and to be and have
the, the, the, the rigor of mind to be
able to do it for themselves to, to work
out how things fit together and to, you know,
be satis dissatisfied with certain answers and to keep
inquiring to all their finances that are good enough.
Uh uh So since you've already mentioned, uh the
intellectual virtues there, let me take this opportunity and
ask you already a little bit more about that.
So, um what uh are intellectual virtues exactly? I
mean, you mentioned Aristotle there and I guess that
it's safe to say that at least in the
western tradition, Aristotle must be the biggest virtue, ethicist
out there. So, uh what uh are intellectual virtues
the same as moral virtues or are intellectual virtues
a different kind of virtue distinct from moral virtues?
So for, for Aristotle, um the, the the virtues
are primarily moral, um I think we can distinguish
them. I mean, certainly some of the traits that
Aristotle was talking about when he talks about the
virtues, he talks about the a good character. So
virtue are a character trait. So they're things that
a traits that when the virtuous traits are admirable
traits of character, these are traits that you've acquired
that you're responsible for not the things that you're
born with, not just your skills or anything. These
are things that you've acquired over time through your
good character and which we admire people for. Uh,
WHEREAS the vices are the, are the opposite of
that. They're the things, they're the despicable character traits,
the things we blame people for, you know, you
know, so someone's, you know, mean and cruel or
whatever, these are their, their vices and that we
blame them for them. Cos we think that over
time their behavior has led to them to have
these traits. Whereas the, the virtuous people, we think
that their good behavior over time has led them
to have these virtuous traits and some of the
traits, some of them are moral, some of them,
uh, are intellectual, you know, they're, um, and in
fact, in, in many cases, there's, there's, this is
why it gets complicated. There's a kind of moral
and an intellectual side, you know. So the thing
I think about courage, courage seems to be a
virtue, uh, courage can manifest itself, you know, maybe
be moral courage, you know, you, you help people
in need and you take risks to yourself. Well,
but there's also, there's a kind of intellectual courage.
You know, you think that people who are willing
to stick to the truth even when it's unpopular,
uh, people are willing to voice ideas, you know,
because they not because they want to be awkward,
just cos they care about the truth and they
feel people around them aren't doing that, you know,
in every, in any society, there's always some issue
where we depend upon the intellectually virtuous people to
keep us to the straight and narrow as it
were. So, here's a, is a character trait, courage
and it has both a moral and intellectual aspect.
Uh, AND then, you know, some, some virtues like
kindness seems specifically moral, some virtues like, um, uh
I'm trying to think of a good example of
this. Um All the ones that spring to mind
out. I, I was gonna say um uh intellectual
humility, but of course, there's humility and there's intellectual
but, but there's a lot of these virtues, we
can think of them as having been specifically intellectual.
So think about intellectual humility, humility in general would
be a kind of um you know, not being
overly proud, not being overly self absorbed and so
on being interested in others and so forth. Intellectual
humility is, is like the intellectual aspect of that.
It's, you know, not um not thinking that my
ideas are better than everyone else that I'm somehow
like, you know, I, I'm, I'm intellectually more important
than everyone else but be interested in what other
people have to say, being open to my possibility,
my fallibility, recognizing it. And so, you know, when
I talk to other people, I'm interested to hear
what they have to say and to think about
what, how to what extent should I change my
mind and being open minded and so forth? So
we can think of some of these traits has
been specifically intellectual. Um, AND, and what interests me
is that, you know, what, what, what, what as
a person, you know, what, what, how do we,
how do we promote those traits and what do
they involve? And I think that what makes an
intellectual virtue, intellectual virtue in part, at least is
this valuing of the truth, this vetic desire as
I call it, you know, someone can pretend to
be intellectually humble. You know, you think about people
on Twitter, you know, there, there, there's a lot
of, I'm sure we can think of people. They,
they, they're very good at pretending to be intellectually
humble, but what drives them is not the truth,
what drives them is uh they want people to
like them or admire them or what have you.
And that's not a virtue for it to be
a virtue. It's gotta be, have the right kind
of motivational state. And in the intellectual case, the
intellectual virtues that it's gotta be rooted in a
motivation, which is a care for the cons for
the truth. So genuinely intellectually humble people, they, they
don't care about the, this, this other stuff. You
know, they don't care about, you know, being admired
or whatever they care about is getting to the
truth. And then of course we do admire them,
but that's not what they're after. What they're after
is the truth. And that grounds their certain kinds
of behaviors, like their intellectual humility, their intellectual tenacity,
their intellectual courage and so on. Uh, YEAH, so
that's the intellectual virtues. I, I think they're really
important traits. Um, AND indeed, I think actually all
of us think that, I mean, you think of
people you admire, uh particularly people you admire from
an intellectual point of view. And I bet you
when you start to describe them, your, your ST
your, your things, the word you'll end up talking
about intellectual virtues. This is the, you know, we,
we recognize that this is a, this is a
good way to be. I mean, Aristotle thought this
is the, it's an epic so that the good
life, the life of flourishing Eudemonia is the virtuous
life. And I think that's right. And so, and
then the thought is one aspect of the good
life is an intellectual aspect. It's uh it's not
just about morality, not just about, there's practical wisdom
as well for, for our soul, but it's also
about having good habits of thought. And if you
think about that, it makes sense. You know, when
we think of imagine someone who is very moralistic,
but then they'd lack intellectual virtues. People like that
are usually a disaster. You know, you know, there's
a saying, I don't know if you have this
in Portugal that the, the, the road to hell
is paved with good intentions.
Yes, we have a similar kind of ri, yeah,
I, I'm sure we all think of people. They,
you know, they, they have very earnest morality but
they, because they don't think things through and they
don't really, they're not careful about the, their, their,
it's, it's their moralities, their moral urges are thrown
all the wrong directions, whatever you need to have
good intellectual traits in order to ground your morality,
in order to have it, have it directed in
the right kind of place, you know, like uh
as uh as Aristotle says, you know, like moral
judgment is a kind of judgment and therefore it
requires a kind of knowledge, it requires a skill
to make, you know, gotta be alert to the
relevant factors. And so the intellectual virtues are really
crucial to uh to morality. That's the way in
which they interconnect cos I sort of think they
connect even more closely. But certainly, you know, the,
the good life has this important component uh which
is specifically intellectual.
Mhm. Uh So I would like to get here
a little bit into education because that's also a
topic of your interest. But just before we do
that, there's perhaps a little bit more uh ground
in epistemology that we have to cover here. That
is probably also important to understand how you think
about and approach education. So what role does luck
play in the epistemology?
So luck's really interesting because it seems like, uh,
know, for, for knowledge, there seems to be an
anti luck condition. And what I mean by that
is when you know something you can't be, it
can't be that you get to the truth by
luck. Right. We seem to have this strong intuition
about knowledge. So, I mean, obviously the obvious case,
like, guess work, you know, you don't, you get
your lucky guesses aren't knowledge. But the, the more
interesting cases are cases where you form your belief
with good reasons. These are get cases that they're
so called. You, you have good reason to believe
something. But even so what you believe is only
true as a matter of luck. So I, I'll
give you a famous one. This is not Getty,
it's uh Roderick Chisholm's, but you're a farmer, you're
looking in a field and you see what looks
like a sheep. So you quite rightly believe there's
a sheep in the field. Uh, AND there is
a sheep in the field, but what you're looking
at isn't a sheep. What you're looking at is
a big hairy dog. Looks like a sheep which
hidden from view behind that is a real sheep.
Now, we have a very strong intuition here. You
don't, you don't know the shit there, right? It's
just luck that your belief happens to be true,
even though your belief is true and it's justified.
It's just luck that it's true. So you don't
know it and that suggests that there's knowledge has
this anti luck but you, you, you can't get
to knowledge through luck. So, what we want, uh,
when we think about what it is to know,
we want to have ways of getting to the
truth, which is sort of luck excluding. And, uh,
one thing I tried to do, uh, in my
work is, um, it, it used to be that
people just took this as um as just a,
an obvious truth and then they move on. But
it seems to me, you know, if we take
it seriously, we should try and unpack it a
little bit and I, we discover when we unpack
it, it gets quite interesting. So first off, if
we unpack it, that means we need a theory
of, we need a theory of what luck is.
And it really odd until a few years ago,
there wasn't a philosophical account of luck. The philosophers
didn't talk about it. They just sort of took
it as we well know what luck, which is
really odd if you think about it, cos philosophers
define everything, even things, arguably they don't need to
be defined. Uh But they didn't bother with that.
Um So one thing I tried to do was
offer a theory of luck and I have work
called a modal theory. And what that means is
that roughly lucky for, for an event to be
lucky. It's gotta be something that doesn't obtain but
could have easily obtained. So, you know, think about
lottery win, you know. Uh, SORRY. Um, I've got
somewhere but lucky it, it obtained but it could
have easily, not obtained. Whereas the other, so think
about a lottery win, you know, what, what, what
makes it a lucky win? Well, you won the
lottery but you could have easily not won the
lottery. Right. There's, you know, think about flo, talk
about possible worlds to make this vivid. So we're
in the actual world, well, that we can imagine
possible worlds. Worlds are slightly different from the actual
world and the, you know, the more different they
are the further out they are. Well, you win
the lottery but it, there's lots of worlds just
like this world you lost. Right? And that's why
it's lucky that you won the lottery. I conversely,
you know, if you don't win, that's why it's,
you're not winning as a matter of, lot of
lot cos you could have easily won. Right. So
it works in both directions. I mean, even though
the probabilities are massively against you, you could easily
win the lottery. Right? But all it matter, all
it needs is a few colored balls forming a
slightly different configuration. And which is why, by the
way, people play lotteries, uh, but they don't make
bets, they would make a bet with those kind
of odds, but they play the lottery. Cos normally
bets with long odds are, are on events that
just, they don't happen in worlds like this world.
You know, um, you know, the odds of that,
I think it's 16 million to one. The British
lottery. So let's say, you know, if you wanted
odds on me winning the Olympic gold at the
next Olympics, that's probably get 16 million to one.
But you'd be crazy to make that bet because
the world in which I win Olympic gold, the
next Olympics is nothing like this world, right? You
know, that's, I'm not, it's not gonna happen. You
know, I need to, I need to be 20
years younger at a different physique and so on.
But it's, you know, different in the case of
the lottery, you know, you, you place a bet
on the lottery by buying a ticket and you
could easily win. Right? I mean, that's, that's why
you do it. Uh, THERE used to be an
advert in, um, in an advertisement in Britain for
the lottery where they used to say that the
slogan was, it could be you. And they had
this sort of finger of God floating, you know,
and people walking along with their tickets and then
they get Zapped. Well, that's, it's not the could,
there is not a problem code, right? Pro It
couldn't be you, but it's a modal code. What
it's saying is it could easily be, you. Not
much needs to change for you to, if you
have a lottery, not much needs to change because
it'd be a lottery win. So, I think that's
what luck is. Luck is about modal closeness. It's
about, you know, um, you know, like, get it
even if you don't, if you don't win the
lottery. Well, it's still, you know, you could have
easily won it. Right. So, it's, uh, that's why
you're not winning as a matter of luck. But
if you do win the fact that you've won
is a matter of luck. Cos you could have
easily, not won and so forth. Or in the
sheep case, you know, schisms sheep case. It's lucky
that his belief is true because although he's got
a true belief, it could have easily been false.
If that sheep behind the sheep, big hairy dog
had wandered off, then his belief would have been
false. So it's a matter of luck given how
he formed his belief, he could have easily been
false. So that's what luck is. And then once
we understand what luck is, we can start to
think about how that relates to knowledge and what
it means in effect, I'll, I'll tell you the
details. But if luck is a modal notion, then
it means there needs to be this modal condition
on knowledge. That's what I call a safety condition.
Knowledge has to be safe. Basically, it's not enough
just to get to the truth, but you've got
to get to the truth in a way which
means that you couldn't have easily been wrong. So
that's the anti luck condition. And so we end
up finding out something quite interesting about knowledge about
the conditions that it demands. And here's something else
that is interesting as well that to the results,
you might think that knowledge has like an ability
condition as well. It's like when, you know, you
get the truth through your abilities, you know, you
can't get there, you can't get there through, you
know, your guess, work, for example, you can't get
there through. You know, I, I, if, if you
have, um, you know, if, if someone thinks that
they're clairvoyant but they're not and they predict something
and it turns out to be true that they
didn't let him know. Right. Because that's not the,
the, the actual bill is this year. It seems
it's gotta be your ability to get there, these
reliable traits to get to the truth. And you
might think, well, that's getting to the truth through
reliable traits. That's luck excluding. And usually it is,
but it's not always like, excluding, which is kind
of interesting. I mean, think about the farmer, the
farmer was getting to the truth in a way
through their abilities. I mean, normally that's a good
way of finding out whether there's a sheep in
the field having a look and if it looks
like a sheep believing it's a sheep, but your,
your abilities can get you to the truth and
yet it could still be the case that your
belief is lucky. So it seems like there's, there,
there are two slightly different conditions on knowledge. One
is about getting there through your abilities. In other
words, be getting there in a way that excludes
luck and they're not quite the same thing. So
I think you find out quite interesting things about
the structure of knowledge by, by thinking about the
role of locking it.
Uh But since getting to through, through your abilities
and excluding luck as much as possible are not
exactly the same thing. I mean, to what extent
can we really be sure about how much epistemological
lucky we are.
Yeah, I mean, that's a good point. So, and
one of the things about skepticism is the radical
skeptic in a way is trying to make it
feel like it's just lucky that we get the
truth, right? So, remember that the radical skeptic, if
they're, if they're clever, they won't say that you
are a brain diverse. They just say, well, you
could be for all, you know, you could be
and of course you can't tell. So it seems
like, well, even if you are not a round
of that, even if everything is just exactly as
you've seen, it feels like, well, isn't it just
a bit of luck? Do you happen to be
in the world like this world rather than in
the world like that one? After all? You can't
tell the difference. Right. Mhm. But that's, that's kind
of interesting. You can re, you can, you can
recast skeptical arguments in terms of this luck intuition.
Um, AND, uh, and I think that behooves us
to come up with answers to these, the skeptical
arguments. Um, YEAH. So, yeah, that, that's true. And
so, hence another reason we have to deal with
skepticism.
Mhm. So, another question then is what is epistemic
risk?
So, it, it's really interesting. The, you know, I
started this debate about luck and then I noticed
that luck and risk go very closely together. I
mean, they're not quite the same thing but they're
very close. They're almost like the same thing viewed
from different angles. So, think about, um, uh, I
suppose you survive a plane crash, you might say
I'm lucky to be alive, right? And what you
mean, it seems one way of understanding that is,
well, I could have easily died, right? You know,
like if I'd been at the back of the
plane, I would be dead and I could have
easily at the back of the plane. But I
was at the front of the plane, the front
of the plane didn't get crushed in the crash.
You know, so I'm lucky to be alive. And
that's from a sort of backwards perspective. You know,
I survived. I'm looking backwards. I say I'm lucky
you could rewind as it were from the forwards
perspective. You could say the exact same thing and,
and put it in terms of risk, you know,
getting onto that plane, I'm at high risk of
dying, you know. Uh, AND, and, and so what,
what that seems to suggest is that risk is
also a modal notion, you know, what is for
something to be high risk is that it means
it could easily, it's something, it's like a risk
event, something you don't want to happen, could easily
happen. So a lot of our assessments of risk,
I think, I like that. You know, like when
I, if I'm wondering to myself, should I get
on that plane? Is it risky? What I'm trying
to think to myself is, is the world the
possible world in which that plane crashes? Is it
a close world? Is it a world like this
one? You know, is there something about that plane,
you know, are the engines bad? Is the pilot
a bad pilot? You know, are the weather conditions
terrible or whatever? Is there something going on which
would make it such that there are close possible
worlds where that plane crashes. If it is, then
that's high risk. Whereas if it's not, you know,
if the plane is reliable and the weather conditions
are great and the pilot's conscientious and so on,
well, then there's low risk because the, the risk
event, the vent of it of it crashing is
not close, it's not the kind of thing that
could easily occur So, so that, so if that's
right, then the modal account of luck and the
modal account of risk, they go hand in hand.
I mean, there, there, there are some complications I'll
spare you. There are some slight differences but roughly,
you know, uh, we, we want to exclude luck.
We want to exclude, uh, from knowledge. We also
want to exclude risk. It's just a question of
perspective. Uh, WHAT the Sorry John.
Yeah. Ok. But, but what if we were talking
about epistemology and knowledge, what are we risking exactly?
So I take it to the risk event when
it comes to epistemology is, is, is supposed to,
you know, we're trying to get to the truth
and the risk of it is, well, we, we,
we fail, we end up with a, with a
false belief instead. So, you know, we have some
way of forming a belief and then, you know,
that's in the like in get cases and actually
it gets us to the truth, but we think
it's not large cos it could have easily led
to the false and, and you can run that
whole thing in terms of risk. You know what
you're saying is in these get a cases, you've
got a way of getting to the truth, which
is risky because it could have easily led to
false do so, you know, it gives forwards versus
backwards perspective. Again, you know, the get a case,
the person got to the truth. And we're looking
backwards a bit like surviving the plane crash. Well,
I got to the truth, but I could have
easily been wrong. We can rewind looking forwards. You
know, the farmer looks out into the field. Ok.
They have a way of forming a belief that's
generally a good way. But in these cases, it's
risky because it could have easily, it could easily
to a false belief. Right. Because it could easily,
you know, the sheep isn't in, is wanders out
of the field, then it'll end up with a
false belief. So it seems like the drive to,
to get rid of lucky true beliefs and knowledge
also is a drive to get rid of risky
true beliefs, get rid of high levels of academic
risk. The reason why this is interesting though is
that, um, some people question the lucky in tuition,
they say, well, you know, is it so clear
that, um, we want to, you know, why, why
can't there be lucky knowledge? You know, and it's,
it's, it's interesting, you know, philosophers have that intuition
quite strongly. I find, um, even the introductory students
get that intuition very clearly, but there is some
reason to think that the general public aren't so
signed up to that intuition as we are, you
know. So, I mean, even in the case of
a lucky guess, we often attribute not, you know,
the, the, the contestant answers the question, they're obviously
guessing someone in the room says, did he know
the answer? Gets it. Right. Yes. He knew the
answer. You know, it seems that doesn't seem terrible
thing to say. Right. So, a lot of people
say, well, maybe lucky is ok then, well, uh,
but then I suppose we've run the same thing
with risk. You know, there does seem a stronger
intuition that getting to their knowledge shouldn't gain to
the knowledge shouldn't be compatible with high levels of
epidemic risk. And, uh, so one thought you can
have here is that risk is where is the
more dominant notion? Like, why do you want to
get rid of luck? It's because you want to
get rid of risk. You know, cos risk is
a thing to be excluded. You know. So the,
the thought is risk is a more primary, even
though they kind of go hand to hand risk
is the more primary notion because we, we care
about getting rid of luck because really what we
wanna do is eliminate, we wanna minimize epidemic risk.
Uh, AND if that's right, that's a way of
grounding that intuition about luck.
Mhm. Yes. And when it comes to those intuitions
that people have, I guess that it's very important
here to keep in mind that. So, for example,
if someone just, uh, luckily guesses the right answer
it, it doesn't ring true that they really knew
what the answer was. Right. I mean, because knowing
the answer is not uh or, or guessing the
correct answer is not the same as knowing it.
I mean, that that's also, I guess at least
if we explain that directly to people, it's, it
also seems intuitive, right? That if someone just guessed
it's not the same as them knowing it.
I mean, this is, I think what I think
you've come across experimental philosophy, but this is one
of the problems experimental philosophers, they, they test, they
test intuitions by going and asking the public questions
and then they get all the data and then
they come back and say, look, this is what
the the public think is intuitive, but the intuitions
aren't just your first judgment or the first judgment
of the folk as it were. That's not an
intuition. And you, you know that you find this
out very clearly when you start teaching philosophy, your
intuitions that where are your sort of judgments under
reflection? So, you know, when you first start teaching
students and you, you can throw out a bunch
of scenarios and they, their, their thoughts are all
over the place. Um YOU know, is it, this
is it that and then as it were that
over time when they start to think about it,
their thoughts start to stabilize. So in that in
the quiz showcase, they might say it's knowledge immediately.
But then when they start to think about it,
well, it's not really knowledge as a guess, you
know. So as it were that first, that first
judgment isn't stable. And what we're interesting when we
talk about intuitions is the ST the stable intuitions.
It's not just the first, the first judgment you
come to, it's what, what when you think about
it, you start to put it together and you
start to reason it through. What, what judgment do
you settle on? And I think there, we, there's
a lot of, you know, there's a lot of
convergence and the philosophers, what we're doing when we
do philosophy is we're trying to examine our intuitions
in that sense, we're trying to let them stabilize
and we're trying to sift them through and see
how they fit together. And it's that considered judgment
is, is the intuition, not the sort of first
judgment.
Uh And since we're talking about risk here, what
would an anti risks epistemology be like?
Yeah, so what you want is um whereas before
you'd have an anti luck condition instead you have
an anti risks condition. So you want to have
a way of form it, you'll build into your
theory of knowledge, um some principle to the effect
that you're forming your beliefs in ways uh that
it's that, that exclude high levels of risk. I
I high levels of risk that your beliefs are
formed to be false. Um And uh of course,
given what I said earlier, that will be understood
modally. So what it will mean is that given
how your foreign beliefs are not close possible worlds
where the risk of it, of the false belief
occurs. So, you know, like, say practical terms, you
know, um, I mean, this is why g guesswork
is no good because guesswork might get you the
truth in the actual world. But of course, it
could easily get you to the, it are lots
of risks. You know, there's lots of close worlds
where it gets to the false blue. But the
more reliable your belief form methods are then the
the more likely it is it will exclude high
levels of risk. The more likely it is that
it will exclude risk in close worlds. So you
can explain a lot of why we care about
certain kinds of method methods, belief form methods because
they're risk excluding. Mhm
So just before we get into education, then are
there valuable kinds of ignorance? I mean, are there
perhaps instances where ignorance would actually be, be valuable?
Yeah, I mean, ignorance is so for now just
take ignorance as I'll explain in a minute, this
is not quite right but take ignorance to be
a lack of knowledge. A lot of people think
that it is well then it it can be
useful, it can be very valuable to not know
things uh uh in the in the sense that
um it can open your, it can open your
mind as it were. Uh There's um uh there's
a saying about um like sometimes when people, they
know a few things, I mean, there, there's the
saying I was thinking of a little knowledge can
be a dangerous thing. I don't know if you
have a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing.
And what does that mean? It's like, well, you,
you know a few things because you know a
few things you think you kind of know everything
and so it kind of gives you a kind
of dogmatic way of thinking about the world, but
you really only know a few things. And so
it's quite useful sometimes to have that little bit
more shaken, you know, like to be, have your
world to be open up and defeat has come,
this defeat is like, you know, new ways of
thinking so on and those new ways of thinking
can, can shake up. And so you don't, now
you start to doubt even what you knew even
though you did know it. Um And so in
that sense, you know, ignorance can be a good
thing. It can, it can spur on. I mean,
it's very interesting in the early modern period with
the scientific revolution and so on. That was driven
by the rediscovery of skeptical texts, pian texts. In
fact, you know, people started doubting more in doubting
more. It drove inquiry. Uh YOU know, there were,
there were some things they knew, but they started
to question everything. Um BECAUSE a lot of what
they knew was grounded in tradition and religious authority
and so on. And they start to, they doubt
it and then they start to re ground it
in, in new ways which are better ways and
so forth. So that's the sense one sense in
which ignorance can be a good thing. There's another
sense in which ignorance is a good thing which
relates to um uh you know, it, which comes
clear once we compare lack of knowledge with ignorance,
I think ignorance is more specific than lack of
knowledge. So ignorance is a, as I would say,
is normative. And what I mean by that is
ignorance is not just lack of knowledge, but it's
lack of knowledge that you ought to have. So
there's lots of, there's lots of things I don't
know right now, I don't know how many spoons
are in my kitchen cupboard, but I wouldn't say
I was ignorant of them. I mean, why should
I, there's no reason to know such a thing
if I would actually, it would actually be a,
a negative thing about me. I think if I
knew that, you know, it would be concerning, you
know, II I, I'm not a virtuous person from
an intellectual point of view. If I know such
things, cos that means I've actually gone to the
trouble of finding it out. There's no point in
finding it out. So mere lack of knowledge doesn't
make you ignorant. I think it's gotta be a
lack of knowledge of things you ought to know.
But what you ought to know as it were
is, is not a fixed matter, you know, like
we, I, if a child doesn't know, you know,
arcane facts about physics, we don't think they're ignorant,
we just think they don't know. Right. There, there's
no expectation. There's no, they, they don't, ought to
know. There's no a for the child. Right. They
ought to know about the things they play things
and so on. They don't need to know about
this stuff. But, you know, if you're a physicist
now there are all sorts of things about physics
that you really ought to know. And if you
don't know that's ignorance, that means that you've failed
in some way as a, as an Inquirer. And
I think this is one of the senses in
which education opens up vistas and in doing so
it makes it such that, um, there are now
things you ought to know, like we hold educated
people to a higher standard of, of, of ignorance,
I think, than the educated people because we think
now there's a wider class of things they really
ought to know. And if they don't know that,
that, that shows a bad character that, that they
don't know these things. So this is the sense
in which ignorance can be. I mean, I don't
know, like, so, uh you know, going back to
my point earlier, so lack of knowledge contrasted with
ignorance. Now, there may be things that I don't
know which are valuable because I don't really, I
don't, ought to, I don't, there's no reason to
know them. So it's actually a good thing. I
don't know. It's a good thing. I don't know
how many spoons are in my cupboard. You know,
that reflects well upon me as an Enquirer. Um
So that's, you know, if we think it lack
of knowledge is ignorance, well, that would be good.
But I mean, as I'm saying, actually, that what
that reveals is that there's more to ignorance than
just lack of knowledge.
Mhm uh But since at the very beginning of
your answer, you mentioned, for example, the scientific revolution
and how back then a few centuries ago, one
of the things that actually drove it, at least
in the initial stages was some people rediscovering uh
so to speak some skeptic texts. I mean, uh
uh uh one thing that came to mind was
so, I mean, I guess that there's a distinction
to be made between two different kinds of ignorance
because I mean, people can be aware of the
fact that they lack certain kinds of knowledge. Like
for example, I've talked with many anthropologists on the
show and I'm very well aware that there are
parts of human evolution, for example, that I I'm
not knowledgeable of. But II, I know that I
like that knowledge, but there's a difference between that
and people not even be, not even being aware
that there's things that they don't know about and
that they don't even know they should know about
or that they even exist out there. Right.
Yeah. Absolutely. I mean, this is, as I say,
the wonders of education, it can open your eyes
to, I mean, one of the dangers not knowing
what you don't know. All right, this is, um,
I mean, I, I, the, the, the, the we're
all in this condition to a certain extent. But,
um, you can, you can education improves you a
lot here. It makes you more aware of what
you don't know. Um, SO, you know more about
what you don't know but through being educated and
that, so even though now you might be, you
might, might, might be still that you're ignorant, you
know, you ought to know. But the fact that
you're aware of the ignorance of it is, is
an improvement upon someone who doesn't, isn't aware of
their ignorance. So that's actually a, it's like a
lesser grade of ignorance. It's a better situation to
be in. Um, AND education is really important for
that to, to make people aware of that. Uh
I, it's one of my favorite saying actually they
don't know what they don't know. I mean, I,
I think a lot of debates, you know, people
would be better off. I mean, just think that
I mentioned intellectual humility earlier on. It's hard to
be intellectually humble if you don't realize how little,
you know, I mean, I, uh, I don't know
if you've been following, um, the, you know, this,
um, what was this conflict in the, in the,
in the Middle East right now? And the people
on Twitter wading in, with very strong opinions and
in some cases they clearly know nothing, you know,
they know nothing about the history. Absolutely nothing. But
it doesn't stop having strong opinions. They don't know
what they don't know. Right. Um, AND, and, and
that, that level of ignorance is actually quite, in,
in this case, I think it's quite dangerous. Um,
YOU know, uh most debates are improved by people
being more aware of their ignorance, of course, even
better prove if they're not ignorant at all. But
you can at least be aware of your ignorance.
So, uh there are many things in epistemology that
we've talked about here, like the virtues, like luck,
risk ignorance. What should education actually be about when
considering all of these aspects uh of epistemology that
we, we've talked about. I mean, what should education
include? Exactly.
So education has lots of aims, not all of
them are epistemic. So some of them are social,
some of them are political and some of them
are practical and so on. But it seems to
me a core aim is epistemic. And what I
mean by it being a core aim is that
it's part of what makes it an educational practice
at all is that it, it's directed at epistemic
goods. So, you know, like, imagine in North Korea,
let's say they have, they have an education program
which is just indoctrination. They might call it education,
but it is an education, right? Whatever that is,
right. You might have the name but it is
an education because it doesn't, doesn't serve epidemic good.
So what makes an educational practice an educational practice
at all is the, is epistemic good. So, in
that sense, the epistemic goods are constitutive of the
practice. They're, they're fundamental. And that raised the question
of which epidemic ends. Are they a lot of
people, I think, think the ends are just, it's,
it's what I call the bucket view. So, you
know, the student is like a buy an empty
bucket and the student and the, the, the job
of the teacher is just to fill the bucket
with facts and skills and things. And that's actually
an absolutely terrible way of thinking about education. It's,
it's surprisingly durable, you know, in certain quarters of
the world. But it's, it's, it's terrible. And if
you think a lot of old, you know, you
know, yeah, Victorian teaching was, was wrote, uh I
don't know if this is the same everywhere but
in, in Britain wrote, learning, I know North America
is like this as well. So rote learning where
you just get people to memorize things. Um You
know, and it was done in a disciplinarian fashion,
you know, like you were beaten if you didn't
memorize things and so on, that's very much wedded
to the bucket model, you know, the bucket, you
know, that you want a bucket and we just
train you like, uh, we just fill you up
and that's all that. It is. There's a different
way of thinking about education now, which I think
is far more plausible and his education is sort
of it, it goes this idea of education as
Liberator, as, as, as, as liberating the individual. It's
very much entitlement, ideas of enlightenment, sorry, ideas about
education have sort of wedded to this, helping the
person to realize their potential to fulfill their intellectual
potential. And that, that view, I think goes hand
in hand with a different idea which is education
is about cultivating intellectual character. And I would say
virtue is intellectual character cos we want students to,
to think for themselves. We want students to require
the good habits of thought so that they can,
you know, make reasonable judgments and they can, they
can basically just think for themselves, that's what they
wanna do. Um So it's o obviously you wanna
teach them facts and skills, but the thought is
teaching them the facts and skills should be grounded
in a more general attitude of helping them to
flourish intellectually. Uh And that means developing their intellectual
virtues. And this is something I'm a big fan
of, I mean, I think that's uh when, when
you look at good teachers, good teachers, I think
just do this instinctively. But what this provides, I
think is a kind of theory. So a conceptual
scheme for making sense of what good teaching looks
like. I mean, think about how good teachers don't
just give you the answer and they don't drum
the answer into you either. They want to create
the conditions under which you can find the answer
for yourself. Uh It's what educationists call productive struggle.
They want you to strive to get to the
truth yourself and they're trying to instill in you
a desire to get there and a joy in
getting there. Cos they're hoping you can internalize these
traits, these traits so that you become the kind
of person that's curious and, and drives your enquiry
and so on and indeed good teachers, I think
tend to be virtuous, intellectually virtuous. They, you know,
when you think about a really good teacher, they're
often there are people who really care about the
truth, they care about, you know, accuracy and so
on and they, they instill that those kinds of
traits into those around them. They are as Aristotle
say, they're exemplars, you know, we, we, we learn
the virtues primarily through emulating exemplars and good teachers.
I think that's their, their virtuous, exemplars, intellectually virtuous
exam. And uh and so, yeah, I've been very
interested in this, this whole theory behind this and
In fact, I'm, I'm trying to put it into
practice. I run a project here. It's called the
Anti to Virtue. So the, the mascot of UC
Irvine is the anti uh Peter. The anti is
their mascot. So uh we call the Anti to
Virtue. So we're, we focus on a core set
of intellectual virtues which we think are important and
we try and embed the teaching of those virtues
into uh our education across all levels. So from
orientation through to graduation, uh you, we, we try
and get give, give students sort of and faculty,
this sort of conceptual scheme to think about what
they're doing in terms of cultivating intellectual character. And
I think this is really important because a lot
of students, I think increasingly so they think about
education instrumentally, it's just a means to an end,
it's just about grades and so on. And this
is, I mean, this isn't good, it's not good
for the soul, it's not good for your well
being. You've gotta think, you know, it's far better
to be able to think that education is something
which is, is developing you as a person, your
personal growth. And I think that's where the, the
virtue come in. We're trying to get students to
have this scheme to think more broadly about what
education is and how it's gonna benefit them if
they do it well, it will benefit them whatever
the, you know, skills get lost facts. Get forgotten
but the virtues stay with you. Right. The, that,
those kinds of traits, you know, once they, once
they're had, they're not easily lost because you, you
see their value and they will, whatever you do
in life, they will help you prosper. You know,
they'll help you do live and not just prosper
financially or whatever, uh, career wise but prosper as
a person, you know, in terms of your relationships,
in terms of uh your hobbies, in terms of
the, your choices, in terms of, you know, what
you do in your retirement or what have you,
these are good traits to have. So these are
the things I think a good education should be
trying to foster.
So, are you actually testing that out uh empirically?
I mean, uh how we can cultivate these intellectual
virtues in uh in this, in that case, university
students?
Yeah. So, yeah, this is really quite exciting because
people have done this sort of thing in schools
a lot and with lots of good results, but
no one's ever done it in a university. And
there's a reason for that. It's very difficult to
um change curriculum through the university, right? You know,
academics are very much, they just do their own
thing, you know, uh they're very autonomous, but we're
very lucky at UC Irvine, there's a real culture
of um pedagogical innovation. We have a chancellor and
advice robots that are really interested in these ideas
and So there's a lot of institutional backing for
us to do this project. So we're now embedding
these modules in and because we're academics, there's a,
as you say, there's a research project about measuring
its effects. So we have a group of um
educational theorists and sociologists and they're running a longitudinal
uh empirical study testing for the, the empirical effects
of what we're doing. So we have like, you
know, people, we have a control group of students
who aren't doing the modules and the ones that
are, and we've seen the difference and the results
we're getting very good and they, they, they confirm
what you get in schools as well, which is
when you educate, explicitly, educate for intellectual virtues, you
get, you get increase in educational outcome, you, you
get an increase in, in well being, which is
very important, but you get an increase in educational
outcomes, pe students who, who do this, do, they
do well, whatever they do, they do well. And
the other thing that's really interesting about this is
that um when you have an intervention in education
of uh pretty much any kind, you get positive
effects just because it's an intervention, right? You're doing
something extra. So you, you know, if you tell
you, if you take a bunch of school Children
and you start teaching them French, uh you know,
another group you don't teach them French. Well, the
pe the students who learn French, there'll be all
kind of positive effects from them learning something new.
But when you teach the intellectual virtues, you don't
just get positive effects of the normal kind. You
get, you get like enhanced positive effects, it sort
of ripples out. It's, it's a, it's a bigger
positive effect and it, it's also one that doesn't
care about where you come from, it doesn't care
about who you are. So a lot of times
when you have an intervention, educational intervention, the students
who are doing well benefit the most and the
students who are doing not so well benefit the
least, right as you'd expect. But when it comes
to virtues, everyone benefits roughly the same, which is
kind of interesting. It's a, it's a, it's a
kind of a, a, it, it's a, it's like
a golden bullet as it were. It's a, it,
it has this magical effect of improving everybody's outcomes
and, and relatedly, it doesn't matter. You, you know,
you doesn't matter if you're male or female, it
doesn't matter what your economic background is. It doesn't
matter what your uh ethnicity is and so on,
but you get the same cos kind of positive
effects. So um what we're trying to do this
project is uh obviously, we want to improve education
at the Irvine, but we have all these materials
and we have this study and that the idea
is to make them publicly available and the study
is publicly available. And so to try and we
want to change the conversation about education, higher education
in particular, you know, what is the point of
higher ed? I mean, I think there is a
real question, particularly post COVID. What's the point? A
lot of people are asking this, you know, COVID,
everything went online, you know, why can't universities go
online? Right. Why, why don't we do that? Why
don't we just have like, you know, online classes
and, you know, you get your grades, why you
go to university? You know, um uh there's a
lot, there's real questions about the value of it
and I think we need to find, we need
to reassert what it, what's so important about it.
And I think quarter that of our mission really
is instilling these intellectual virtues and showing how they
help people to, to thrive and to
prosper. Mhm. So let's put a pin on uh
going to university online because I want to ask
you a little bit more about what you think
might, might be the role of technology here. But
um I mean, uh one more question I wanted
to ask you about that project that you're running
is, do you have at least with the data
that you already have, is it possible to tell
if these intellectual virtues that you are cultivating in
students would stick with them? Uh LONG term? I
mean, uh e even after they finish university and
for uh I guess uh ideally the rest of
their lives because, I mean, as with other things
in education, I mean, sometimes it's a matter of
people just forgetting, forgetting things they learned. Other times
it's not exactly that issue, but more of an
issue of the social environment people find themselves in
when they're going to work and in other contexts
of their lives that really does not promote uh,
something that they have learned. And in this particular
case, I mean, I would be worrying if that
would also have an effect in terms of the
intellectual virtues. They were uh inculcated with, let's say
that's a, that's a really good question. And uh
to my knowledge, there hasn't been an empirical study
on it. We, we're not, we can't test it
just yet. We, we're doing a longitudinal study. So
we're testing it throughout the course of the degree
cos when students leave, difficult to keep track of
them, we, we do want to do that though.
That would be like if we're thinking of a
follow on ground, we track them afterwards and see
what happens. But if that's quite a tricky thing
to do, I mean, I did a project years
ago with prisoners. We, we um the prison education
project, we track students, uh the prisoners who are
learning about the intellectual virtues have got the great
effects. But then when they leave, when I mean,
just privacy considerations, we're not allowed, we just weren't
allowed, right? We're not allowed to track them any
further. Um, WHICH is a real shame cos it
would be, you know, lovely to find out. Well,
does it affect recidivism rates? You know? Do they?
Uh, WE are, seems plausible. We had these big
effects on the prisoners, um, seems plausible that they're
less likely to reoffend. No idea that cos we
can't, uh, just so we would like to do
that and, um, and there should be results. I
mean, intuitively, it feels like, you know, character traits
look like they have more stability than their skills.
You know, I mean, one of the big challenges
for education uh is this problem of, of, of
de degradation, a lot of what we teach students
gets lost and it gets lost very quickly. You
know, we spend years, a lot of money treating
people up in knowing things and having skills and
then you test them five years later and most
of it's gone. Um But you see his way,
it gets interesting because, you know, if going back
to the value of an education, you know, 11
conclusion, well, what's the point then, you know, maybe
it better if they just did something else. Um
But actually, you know, if, if, as I think
is plausible, what we're doing in education is developing
character and the character isn't the sort of thing
that just degrades so quickly, which seems plausible. Well,
then that would be with the point of education.
So, I, I would bet, I would bet my
bottom dollar, uh, that, uh, intellectual character doesn't degrade
quickly in the way that new skills and, and
memory does. Um, BUT that's, you know, as you
said, it's an empirical question. Someone needs to test
that. Uh, MAYBE we'll get to do it. It's
a hard thing to test. But I, it is,
need testing.
Mhm. Yeah. I mean, the only thing I was
mostly worrying about here and if that's true, of
course it would be no one's fault, I guess.
But, uh, one thing is for individuals to have
their own character traits that they could, they can
develop, of course. But, uh, I mean, there's also
the context, right? And, I mean, people are part
of a particular social epistemic context and, I mean,
I, I would worry that if, for example, they
move into work and other contexts of their life
that do not really promote the flourishing of these
intellectual virtues and other related traits that if they
would really last, you know, because, uh, I mean,
I don't know if you agree with me or
not but I guess it's, uh, when it comes
to humans it's not just about, uh, the character
traits that we as individuals have. I mean, the,
the environment that surrounds us also plays a big
role actually in allowing for the flourishing of those
same traits. Right.
No, I, I absolutely agree. So, I mean, I
have an interest in this, like, so there are
certain kinds of workplaces that in, in theory are
meant to promote intellectual, like virtues like science, you
know, you might think science ought to be won.
And so one issue there is what does it?
And if not, you know, so if not, how
do you fix that? And, uh, you know, I've
written some few things about this. So, like, you
know, in the, in the scientific case, people worry
about, well, you know, there's drive for results, there's
drive for grants, does that to what extent does
that undermine these intellectual virtues? And one thing we've
argued in a paper on this with a colleague
where we it would be good to institute certain
kinds of frameworks uh into, you know, there's some
of them is there already, I mean, I think
some of the, the things about, you know, academic
honesty and misconduct and so on that kind of
important to speak to that. But you want to,
you want to develop, you can develop frameworks which
reward intellectually virtuous inquiry and so on. And there
there would be ways of doing that because you
can see how this would benefit the discipline as
a whole, you know, to be benefit science as
a whole. If if, if people aren't just thinking
about, you know, the the the prizes and the
grants, but they're also thinking about getting to the
truth and so forth. And you can imagine a
similar thing might work with other disciplines where you'd
want the intellectual virtues to be prominent, like, you
know, journalism, let's say, uh, or, you know, government,
you know, um, the tricky one is where you've
got, like, private industry. And, uh, you know, I
mean, even in private industry, you know, there'll be
aspects of it, like, there'll be a regulatory part
of it. You know, when you, you know, if,
if you're in the sort of energy industry then
you want people are regulating it to be directed
by intellectual virtues to care about the truth. You
know, if someone's regulating, you know, nuclear, nuclear facilities,
you don't want them worrying about. I mean, this
is, I don't know if you ever saw that
great program, Chernobyl, there was a TV series about
shovels. Just, yeah, I watched some of it. Yeah.
What was really interesting about that? Which came across
quite vividly is that the concern for the truth,
you know, in it, they, they, they fell away,
they, they, they started to believe the lies as
it were, they, they sort of state funded lies
and as it, the idea is like, you can
get away with that in the short term, but
in the long term, you just can't get away
with it. And that's the Chernobyl disaster is like,
you know, reality is where, as they say, biting
you on the bottom sort of thing, you know,
comes, come back to haunt you, you can't get
away with sort of fabricating the truth indefinitely. Um
So there, you know, there's something to, uh even,
even like in private industry, you know, you could,
the, the, the, it's hard, harder I think to
make the case there. But even there, I think
you can make the case that, you know, if
you, if you, if your, if your structures in
your company aren't grounded in desire for the truth,
then, you know, maybe in the short term, you'll
get benefits. You know, people are sort of cutting
corners or whatever and getting results. But in the
long term, it's gonna come back to haunt you,
you know, you'll have people who are doing inappropriate
things, you know, and so forth. Uh YOU need
to a culture of can care for the truth.
It's actually ii I think is a, is a
way for us all to prosper, including I think
even in the private industry case. Well, that's, that's
the whole other case. But you, you're absolutely right.
That context take someone with good character, force them
to be in a social context where no one
cares about good character that you're making it hard
for them to manifest a good character. And um,
you know, you can, I think this gets depicted
quite vividly in novels. You know, there, there's a
certain kind of novel, someone looking back on their
life and they start off, well, it all goes
wrong. It's cos they, they embedded themselves in the
wrong kind of environment and they absorbed the, the
values of that environment and in doing so it's
like a tragic floor as it were in doing
so, they, they cut themselves off from certain other
kinds of goods, you know, you know, like the
person who becomes career orientated in a way they
never were. And then on their deathbed they realize
they neglected the people they cared about, you know.
Mhm
Yeah. Uh uh I was just thinking also that
perhaps sometimes in epistemology, philosophers also talk about the
concept of uh epistemic responsibility and I would guess
that it's not circumscribed to individuals. I mean, of
course, individuals have their own uh epistemic responsibility, but
it's also a sort of shared responsibility. I mean,
our, there's a sort of broader social epistemic responsibility
that we should have, right? I mean, it's not
just about the individual themselves but also about the
broader social epistemic environment,
right? Yeah. And I think this is increasingly important
in the information age with the way like it's,
it's very hard and increasingly hard to insulate yourself
from the social world around you. And I mean,
think about the misinformation that occurs on the internet
and how harmful that is. I mean, I've, I've
been reading some of these studies about like educational
performance in uh teenagers and it's dropping off the
cliff and they think it's, it's, it's phone use
and social media use. Um YOU know, the the,
there's things you can do as an individual to
combat misinformation. But if you, if the structures around
you are massively wedded to, to developing these, these,
this misinformation and, and, and leading you Australia and
so on, there's limits to what you can do
as an individual. And I think then we need
ways of, of controlling that, you know, how do
we, and, and it's a really hard question to
solve because we also believe in free expression. We
don't want the state interfering overly in, in private
lives and so on. So there's a real trade
off here. But I think, you know, I mean,
II, I, by the way, you know, like Twitter
X or what it was called, now, they'd have
these reader commentaries, you know, I think that's a
really interesting development. You know, it's a kind of
a, you know, it's not perfect, but it's a,
it's a good sort of democratic way of getting
people to realize that the information they're being fed
is at least suspect, you know, when you have
these reader comments and so on and then people
can rate them. So then you get a kind
of, you know, feedback loops and so on. And
I think, you know, that there are ways to,
to mitigate this, but we, but we do that
and these are basically their kind of their structural
ways of mitigating it. We, we can't put all
the emphasis on the individual because I think that's
just too much of a demand. We have to
think of ways to make it easier for the
individual to, to, to promote their, their character in
these epidemically and friendly environments.
Mhm. So since you mentioned social media there and
misinformation, I guess that would make for a good
segue into my last question then. So how do
you look at the role of technology in education?
I mean, do you look at it mostly positively,
mostly negatively and uh I mean, positively or negatively,
what do you think is the role that it
can and should play in education?
Well, I mean, one way I think about technology,
it's, you can think of it as like a
tool and tools. Well, you know, they used, well,
they won't use badly and generally speaking, they're a
good thing, but of course, they can, but with
the provider, they can use badly. Um So, you
know, like calculate, you know, with calculators come along
and then uh it used to be that people
could do certain kinds of rhythm, rhythmical calculations in
their head. People don't, didn't do it anymore. Cos
what's the point? You know, we've got this. Uh
SO in one sense, you have a kind of
degradation of uh onboard conti powers, but it, in
a sense it's kind of harmless because the tool
use, we're embedded in an environment where the tool
is available. So, you know, in a sense and
I I would view that generally positive. I think
it's kind of, it kind of goes with the
extended cognition that this way of thinking about the
idea about the extended cognition is that we're kind
of apt as the kind of subjects we are
to offload to our environment, um cognitive processes uh
because that's the most efficient way to do things,
you know, you can even think of language as
being a bit like this, You know, if you
try and do everything in your head, but then
you verbalize it and then you can write it
down, you know, you know, writing something down is
a good way of thinking, you know, that, which
is kind of interesting, you know, like IIII I
find, you know, typing is a way to, to
clarify my thoughts. It's like you externalize your thoughts
and through the technology and then that helps you
to think, think more clearly about what I think,
you know, if I try and do that in
my head, it's harder and lots of things are
like this. Um WE, we, we offload and the,
the cong and as it were, the technology becomes
part of the cognitive process and that's extended cognition.
The thought is it, it's not just tool use,
it's more than just tool use there where the
tools were, become part of the technology becomes part
of the, the, the overall comp process. And, and
this has been going on for a long time.
But what's interesting about the information age is that,
uh, well, two things, I mean, one is massive,
massive increase in techno in the way in which
we're embedded in technological environments. You know, it's not
just like pen and paper, you know. So it's,
it's there but it, it's everywhere, you know, where,
you know, you think you walk through a shop,
you know, you, you use the app and so
on and then you're looking up things and, uh,
and so, you know, there's information on the boards
and so on which is responsive to you. And
so, so it, it's a massive increase in that.
But the other thing is that as it were,
the, the, the, the, the technology which has become
incorporated into your processes is information processing technology. So,
you know, like the pen isn't, that's not information
pro it's just, it's just simply a me, it's
like, it's a bit like, you know, the, uh,
a walking stick is a means to walking and
a pen is like a means to writing. But
the phone, you know, your phone as it were,
which is that now like it's wedded to you,
right? Most people, you know, they lose their phone,
they feel like this is an injury to themselves.
And there's a reason for that. I think cos
in a sense it is a bit like themselves.
It's like an extension of them, a lot of
their thinking is done through their phone a lot
of their cognition. You know, we used to memorize
phone numbers in our head. We talked about the
phone book earlier. You say you must be old
enough to. Are you old enough there? I remember
when I used to know, like, about a dozen
phone numbers. Yeah. Oh, I, I don't think, I
didn't know, I think I know my own phone
number. I maybe know what of it but I
don't know any others, but now they're all on
the phone as it were. There's a lot of
that information that would have built in your head
is now on the phone. And so it's kind
of like an extension. It's like your, there's your
onboard memory and then your, your technological memory and
so something very different is occurring. Now we've got
information processing occurring, which is kind of like your
information processing, but it's outside your, your head. Um,
YOU know, like as long as do you know
that phone number, do you know? So and sos
phone where you say yes and then you go
to your phone and that's kind of interesting, you
know, it's like, do you know it? Well, I
know it cos me as it were is not
just me in my head, it's me and this,
this thing attached to my body as well, you
know. Um, SO I think this is the, the,
th this, this gets really interesting. Um And of
course, now, is this a good thing or a
bad thing. Well, I mean, generally speaking, it's a
good thing if um the technology's reliable, you know,
it's a, and, and generally speaking, it's a bad
thing if the technology is giving us bad answers.
So, you know, if, if, if it seems true
that a lot of this social media is, um
you know, it's, it's leading us into silos of
thought, leading us into misinformation and so on. Well,
that's problematic. Uh It, it can also be problematic
in another way, which is that um if, if
to use technology well means to be intellectually virtuous
in your use of it. And this is something
I've argued, you can't offload to technology, you know,
the intellectual character as it were, is, is about
you, it's not about the techno. So what we
want to instill in people is good character so
that the way in which they incorporate the technology
is, is virtuous. And if you don't instill that
good character, then I think what happens is that
the, the technology gets incorporated and it just amplifies
the bad character. And I think we see this,
you know, like people who have got intellectual vices
who are prone to dogmatism, for example, you know,
you get a dogmatic person and then now they,
they wed it to their phone and to the
internet and the internet as it were confirms their
dogmatism makes them more dogmatic. Uh It makes them
as l as lock would say an enthusiast, this
is the worst kind of dogmatist. They, they have
full of passion and intensity to use the yeast,
his famous phrase, passionate tendency. But for all the
wrong things, you know. Um SO, you know, they
lack the humility as we were saying earlier, they
don't know what they don't know and so forth.
Um So it's really important now, increasingly important, we,
we give people the intellectual virtues uh so that
when they do make use of this technology, it
we amplify the good traits in them and not
am don't amplify the bad traits. And of course,
it's also important that we have, as I mentioned
before, the structural uh constraints which help people to
be virtuous cos as you say, you know, you
put, put a virtuous person in an, an epidemically
unfriendly environment over time, it's gonna be very hard
for them to maintain their virtue. So you have
to make it so that it's not so unfriendly
the environment that it does that
uh Great. So let's send on that note then
and Dr Pritchard just before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
Uh Yeah. So I'm, I'm, I'm very lucky in
the internet age in that. My name is quite
unusual. So it's funny like, you know, when we
were growing up, it wouldn't matter what your name,
what you'd be Joe Bloggs or whatever And uh,
so what? Right. But now it turns out having
a name that a lot of people don't have
is a really useful thing. Cos then people can
put your name into the internet. If you put
Duncan Bridge Art Philosophy, I come up. Whereas if
my name was, you know, John Smith, it'd be
like a million things, you know, how would you
tell me apart? So, I'm very lucky on that
score You put Duncan Bri Philosophy come up. But
uh I have a web page which is again,
I think it's WW dot Duncan pritchard.org, which has
my papers on there and it has stuff it
has about my anti to Virtues project. If you're
interested in that talks about the other things I've
done like the prison work and so forth and
uh and my interest in education and so forth.
So everything's there if you're interested uh by all
means, drop me a line.
Great. So I'm leaving links to all of that
in the description box of the interview and Dr
Pritchard. Thank you so much again for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk to you.
It's been a pleasure to talk to you, Ricardo.
Thanks very much for having me on. That was
great.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perego Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten B are no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ
Conners, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine
in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field,
Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus
and H her me and Lain Jung Y and
the Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel
S friends, David Sloan Wilson Yaar ro ro Diego,
Jan Punter Romani Charlotte Bli Nico Barba Adam hunt
Pavla Stassi na me, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall Eden. Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Gilon Cortez Solis Scott
Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey,
Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week. Linda Brendan Nicholas
Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perras,
Kate Van Goler, Alexander, Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud.
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings
David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers is our
web Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard
N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick
Golden. And to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergi,
Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.